[Claire] Previously...
[Inquisitor]
You have a sister.
Wouldn't you rather she
hear your words than mine?
[Fanny] ♪ Be beside... ♪
[Claire] How could you
possibly know that song?
My mother taught it to me.
Contact this Claudel fellow
and encourage him
to meet with me.
I have a favor to ask of you.
my stepbrother.
Have you heard of a man
by the name of
le Comte St. Germain?
You are his son.
If you are truly his heir.
then you can use
what he has left you for good.
Monsieur Beauchamp told me that
I'm the son of a great man.
I'm already the son
of a great man.
- [glass shatters]
- [screams]
[Marsali] Didna bother to put
a note on it this time.
[Roger] This letter
is from Francis Marion.
He'll get us the guns we need.
What about your wife?
It was her idea
I pretend I was dead.
Ye ken the book written
by her other father?
Frank Randall?
[Jamie]
There's mention of a battle
in the backcountry at a place
called King's Mountain.
[Frank] Who will hold her
once you're gone?
[dramatic music plays]
[Frank]
In the autumn of 1779.
King's Mountain
presented a serene vista.
reminiscent
of Scotland's Culloden Moor
before its historic bloodshed.
Yet. as history would record.
this tranquility
was merely the calm
before a storm of iron and fire.
[gunshots. explosions.
people shouting]
Major Patrick Ferguson
and his Loyalist militia
established their stronghold
at the summit.
commanding the high ground
with strategic superiority.
Below. Sevier.
Cleveland. Fraser.
and their Overmountain troops
gathered.
their resolve as firm as the
earth beneath their feet.
The initial ascent was perilous.
with many a rebel picked off
as they clawed their way
up the mountainside.
The battle was swift and fierce.
Like penned ducks.
290 Loyalist militiamen.
including Ferguson himself.
were slain.
The Rebels suffered
minimal losses.
Only twenty-eight fell.
Including me.
[dramatic music plays]
♪ ♪
[singing in Gaelic]
♪ Soraidh slàn ♪
♪ Gu Loch Abar ♪
♪ ♪
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say. could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over the sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
♪ Billow and breeze ♪
♪ Islands and seas ♪
♪ Mountains of rain ♪
♪ And sun ♪
♪ All that was good ♪
♪ All that was fair ♪
♪ All that was me ♪
♪ Is gone ♪
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say. could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over ♪
♪ The sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
[dramatic music plays]
♪ ♪
[light music plays]
[insects chirping]
I thought if I stood there...
saw the place
with mine own eyes.
then maybe I could find proof
that Frank was wrong.
But every detail...
high ground...
steep approach...
the way the fighting
will unfold...
everything he wrote makes sense.
I thought maybe he was
tormenting me.
because I left him
or that maybe he wrote the book
to torment you
for taking me from him.
What if it's neither?
Aye.
Because there...
on that mountain...
...it felt like the truth.
♪ ♪
[hoofbeats]
[Fergus] Come over here. boys.
The pressman inks the letters.
Yeah.
We place the paper
in the frisket...
fold it over the frame.
Then we bring this down.
Bop.
Pull the lever...
et voilà.
we'll have a printed page.
Is there anything better?
- May I try?
- Of course.
[stool scraping]
I made this just for you.
What is it?
I don't want
to disappoint you. Papa.
I'm... different.
You could never disappoint me.
And there is no shame
in being different.
You may be small. but you're
capable of great things.
Now...
pull the devil's tail.
Yah!
Well done.
Germain.
♪ ♪
Alors...
Oh... [chuckling]
...magnifique.
No smudges. eh?
You're a natural.
"Fergus Fraser & Sons."
This will be yours one day.
mes fils.
La plume est notre épée.
"The pen is our sword."
And we can never lay it down.
Aye?
♪ ♪
[footsteps approaching]
[Amaranthus] William!
We were becoming quite anxious
without any word from you.
I found Ben.
What do you mean?
His grave?
He's definitely not in a grave.
[scoffs] But you've known
that all along.
He's risen
to the rank of general-
General Rafe Bleeker.
Did you know that?
No.
[scoffs]
Though it doesn't surprise me.
He claims it was
at your behest...
that he feigned his death.
I- I couldn't dissuade him
from joining the rebellion.
I- I pleaded with him.
begged him!
[sighs] But you Greys...
once your minds are set.
nothing else matters.
Nothing.
Nobody.
I wouldn't say that.
We have our convictions.
Ben held his deeply.
He cared for you.
Not enough.
Not nearly enough.
It was only by impressing
upon him the horrors
of betrayal for Trevor.
having-having a traitor
for a father.
that he-that he finally
consented to disappear quietly.
rather than igniting
public scandal!
I wanted a coward. William...
a man who would avoid
conflict and peril.
And you thought
that might be me?
At first.
Uncle John had mentioned
you'd resigned your commission.
[sighs]
But it wasn't long before I saw
the truth of you...
what you truly are.
[scoffs]
Your-your face. what happened?
What do you think happened?
He did that?
[dramatic music plays]
[exhales sharply]
I must inform Papa
and Uncle Hal.
They must learn
of Ben's survival. his alias.
Perhaps they needn't know
that you knew of it.
- They'll hang him.
- No. they won't.
Yes. they will.
I've heard the officers
at their gatherings...
eager for the news for
Washington and his commanders.
You still love him?
- You agreed to marry me.
- Nothing has to change.
We-we still can.
♪ ♪
Um. William...
you've returned.
Excellent.
Although looking
a little worse for wear.
Hal is en route from London.
Parliament is eager for news
regarding the success
of our military endeavors.
It's a blessing that
Amaranthus and Trevor are here.
a silver lining in the terrible
news we must deliver.
Papa...
♪ ♪
Ben is alive.
Now a military leader
among the Patriots.
under an assumed name.
My God. are you certain?
I saw him with my own eyes
at the Continental camp.
♪ ♪
I suppose we must. um...
thank the Lord
for the small mercies.
♪ ♪
I'm sorry I doubted you.
Oh. you've had quite the shock.
Come. sit.
♪ ♪
We'll fetch some tea
and. uh. something to eat.
You'll feel better
with something in your stomach.
I dreaded telling my brother
that his son was dead.
but this is...
I know. um...
but. Uncle John. there...
there's something
I should tell you.
[William] There's no need
to speak any further.
Rest now.
We've all been shaken
by these revelations.
No.
It's important for Uncle John
to hear this.
Very well.
Never mind the tea.
I'll fetch the brandy.
♪ ♪
[footsteps departing]
[Marsali] Fergus said Beauchamp
was a popinjay.
His story was so incredulous
that even if it was a novel.
no self-respecting publisher
would even touch it.
But still.
heir to Comte St. Germain?
Oh.
[chuckling]
Two. please.
- [sighs] Thank you.
- Thank you.
Fergus doesna want anything
to do with any of it.
Doesna mean to be a pawn
for someone else's interests.
Thinks it might be a ploy
to harm the Patriot cause.
I mean. if the French do take
the Old Northwest...
Well. Lord John did say Percy
is a slippery fellow.
Two onions. please.
Oh. but imagine inheriting
a fortune like that.
Thank you.
I could be parading around
in a silk gown.
- [both chuckle]
- I can see it now.
[laughs] It's been so nice
having you here.
I know.
When are you and Roger
thinking of leaving?
Well. actually. we. um...
we're meeting with one of
Marion's agents tomorrow night
at the wharf
to give him the gold.
And then we'll collect the
rifles outside of town tomorrow
and bring them home.
[Marsali gasps]
Rebel bitch.
You're the printer's wife.
How dare you?
Tell your filthy frog of an
husband to mind what he prints!
No more of his rubbish!
[Brianna]
Come on. Let's go.
♪ ♪
You don't mind
if I wear this. do you?
[stream gurgling]
The Frasers are kind to me.
But I miss you so much. Janie.
Mistress Fraser made pancakes
for breakfast this morning.
[whispering]
But they were burnt to cinders.
[normal voice]
She tries. though.
So I ate them anyway.
Didn't want to upset her.
Oh. no.
Oh! No!
No. no. no. no. no. no!
Darling.
- What's wrong?
- My lace. it's gone!
[Claire]
Well. what do you mean?
I had a square of lace.
I know it was here. but...
Well... well. when did
you last see it?
It was with Jane's things
when Mr. Fraser
gave this to me at Monmouth.
All right.
and have you had it since?
I looked at the treasures
a few times
on our journey home.
[cries]
I wanted to feel close to Jane.
But now...
It seems
like you must have lost it
somewhere along the way.
No. we have to find it.
I'm so sorry. darling.
The lace...
is it Janie's?
Yes.
My grandmother made it.
She was a lace maker.
[somber music plays]
Where?
Paris.
Janie and I never lived there.
but Mother did
when she was a girl.
We'd visit sometimes.
♪ ♪
Grandmother in Paris?
Do you remember her name?
She was just grand-mère to me.
I don't remember much.
♪ ♪
Oh darling.
It's all right.
I would like to go home now.
[Lord John] You've been
concealing the truth
since the moment you arrived.
I felt I had to.
Can you blame me?
What would you have done
in my position?
You thought we
wouldn't understand?
I- I feared you would understand
all too well.
You were protecting yourself
and Trevor from being cast out.
fearing Uncle Hal's wrath
if he knew
about Ben's allegiances.
Yes. Yes.
That was my fear.
Posing as Ben's widow
seemed a safer claim.
And an incredibly lucrative one.
Have you ever gone hungry.
My Lord?
I have.
And I would stoop however low
to keep my son from that fate.
[glass shatters]
[dramatic music plays]
♪ ♪
[footsteps departing]
[door slams]
[sighs]
Uh. perhaps that was
a little harsh.
I do appreciate her predicament.
And I suspect you do. too.
I'm not blind to how close
the two of you have become.
What does that have to do
with anything?
Just remember...
your cousin is alive.
and she is his wife.
Whatever feelings you have.
any association with her
beyond what is perfunctory
familial duty
would be improper
and impermissible.
I don't have any interest
in entangling myself
with anyone who deceives me...
no matter the reason.
She did what she felt
was necessary
for the sake of her child.
I don't approve of it.
but I understand it.
That seems to be
a common excuse.
- Where are you going?
- It doesn't matter.
William!
♪ ♪
Ca va. mon amour?
That's not blood. is it?
Just a slight mishap
involving some tomatoes.
Hmm.
[indistinct chatter]
[Fergus sighs]
Another one of these.
"Ladybird. ladybird.
fly away home.
Your house is on fire.
and your children are gone."
[clicks tongue] Look at this.
"Bird" B-U-R-D.
[Fergus] Hmm.
- It's our poet.
- Hmm.
Do you remember the one
about Cock Robin?
"Who killed Cock Robin?
'I. ' said the sparrow
'with my bow and arrow.'"
Ugh. I can't listen to it.
Just put it in the drawer
with the others.
I will.
So where does this new one rank?
Best or worst
of our anonymous collection?
I think somewhere in the middle.
- Papa. you're home!
- [Fergus] Oh!
A Dhia!
What have you done to yourself?
Germain was showing me
how to clean the ink bowls.
Ah. Hmm.
Where are your sleeve covers?
I didn't want
to dirty them. Papa.
They're too nice.
[chuckles]
The printer's pride lies
in keeping his hands clean.
That's something
you'll need to master. eh?
Go wash it off. then.
before it stains for good.
- Oui. maman.
- Allez.
Christ.
He's a sight. isn't he?
Dinna lie.
You're proud as punch.
He's beautiful.
even covered in ink.
I ken.
This shop...
it's been so good for the boys.
I willna let idle threats
scare us away
from something
that brings them so much joy.
[chatter continues]
For all our children...
present and future.
Fergus Fraser. are you trying
to populate the entire colony?
Well. my love.
making love and making babies
are one and the same.
[upbeat music plays]
♪ ♪
- [muttering indistinctly]
- Okay. let me help you.
Okay.
♪ ♪
[gasps. moaning softly]
[laughs]
[laughing] Just leave it.
♪ ♪
[door rattling]
- Shh. Door's locked.
- [children laughing]
♪ ♪
[Claire] Unfortunately.
the lace was gone.
Fanny was so upset.
And she said...
it was made
by her grandmother...
who was a lace maker in Paris.
- "A lace maker in Paris"?
- Mm.
It's a slender thread.
but it's something.
I- I seem to recall...
a lace maker
across from
Master Raymond's apothecary.
Yes.
I went there once.
I heard a child's cry that day.
What if it was her. Claire?
Our daughter?
[dramatic music plays]
Is it possible?
Faith.
I always wondered
if Mother Hildegarde
called her that...
if she somehow knew
of the rift between us...
how close we came
to losing everything.
You told me you hated me.
I just wanted you
to feel my pain.
I ken. Sassenach.
Perhaps she chose that name
because she wanted to remind me
to hold on...
not just to a belief
in something greater...
but in us...
...and the life we still had
ahead of us.
[chuckles softly]
♪ ♪
I'm so scared...
to lose you again.
♪ ♪
With everything that's about
to come...
♪ ♪
...how can I have faith...
when I face that possibility?
Well. it's the unseen threads
that bind us...
woven by a hand...
far greater than our own.
Hold on to me. Claire.
♪ ♪
Always.
[insects chirping]
Percy.
A votre service.
What brings you here?
I have some information for you
regarding
a certain acquaintance.
[door closes]
[Lord John]
Tell me about Richardson.
The erstwhile captain
was seen in Charlestown
boarding a ship
and intends to make his way
to Savannah soon.
[bottle thuds on table]
Excellent news.
Thought you might be pleased.
I'll keep my ears open and
let you know when he arrives
and where he'll be staying.
May I ask.
what you intend to do with him?
No. you may not.
I can't imagine you'll be
sipping fine brandy
with the man.
Oh. you can imagine
anything you like.
but you will forget that
we had this conversation.
Hmm.
[glass thuds lightly on table]
You're looking well. John...
and as handsome...
as you did
at our parents' wedding.
You recall that day?
Not particularly.
I do.
I remember everything.
Well. I've labored very hard
to forget.
♪ ♪
How we touched hands
in the church?
[scoffs]
And then later. we slipped
away to the bell tower.
You can't have forgotten that.
I- I wanted to go slow...
to savor every inch of you.
But you were so hungry
for me back then.
♪ ♪
Perseverance...
never was a man so well named.
♪ ♪
There was a time
when you loved me. John.
If only you were sufficiently
honest enough with yourself
to admit it.
♪ ♪
W-William-William-William-
I-I wasn't expecting you.
Um. this is a-a.
um... a colleague.
And-and-and-and we were
discussing business.
I thought
there was nothing worse
than having a traitor
for a father.
I'll take my leave.
♪ ♪
Business. eh?
Perhaps this explains
why you never told me
you were governor
at Ardsmuir Prison
and knew James Fraser
long before Helwater.
Who told you that?
It's true. isn't it?
Fraser was your prisoner.
Yes. but...
How is it that a warden cared
enough about a prisoner.
a traitor to agree
to raise his son?
Was he one of your conquests.
or were you one of his?
N-neither.
You'll forgive me
if I don't believe that.
Coming from a liar.
a hypocrite. and a sodomite!
I'm sorry f-for what you saw!
And I know you don't understand.
But-but understand this!
James Fraser and I were friends!
And you have no idea what
we have sacrificed for you!
The lengths we have gone to
for you. to protect you!
I've had enough
of your ingratitude!
I've tried to get you
back on your feet.
But if you choose to use
this to-do with Amaranthus
as yet another excuse
to fritter away your life.
then you can do it
somewhere else.
And if you ever dare speak
to your father that way again...
I don't have a father!
♪ ♪
[breathes shakily]
[distant bird chirping]
[lock clicks. door opens]
A letter from Ian.
posted from Philadelphia.
Says he spoke
to a lass at the brothel.
a friend of Jane's.
She didna ken much
but gave him
this pamphlet she saved
with a story about Jane
published after her death.
Salacious and gory details
of the murder.
Scandal sells.
Nothing new there.
Not only that.
Ian tracked down the writer.
persuaded him
to share his notes.
[Jane] My mother's name
was Faith Pocock.
As my grandmother lay dying.
she told my mother
an incredible story.
that one day...
A strange little man
from the apothecary
came with a baby.
He asked her to look after it
and said he'd come back.
but if he didn't...
she was to find
Lady Broch Tuarach.
So she waited.
But he never returned.
So she went to find the lady
and was sent to the house
of a wine merchant...
where the servant told her that
this lady had left the country.
And our grandmother wondered who
could leave such a sweet child.
By then. of course.
she'd fallen in love
with the baby girl.
Years later...
my mother learned
that this lady lived
in the mountains
of North Carolina.
Our family was
on our way to find her
when our ship was taken
by pirates
and our parents were killed.
♪ ♪
I need my sister to know
that I love her
more than life itself.
[chuckles] This is proof
of that. I suppose.
♪ ♪
But I want her to know
that I'm at peace with dying.
that none of this was her fault.
and that I'd do it again.
And if God owes me anything...
and believe me. He does...
♪ ♪
Then He'll help her find
this lady when I'm gone.
♪ ♪
So she has a chance
to be safe...
♪ ♪
...to be loved...
...as she deserves.
♪ ♪
Faith was coming to find us.
Maman! Maman! Papa! Smoke!
- Wake up! Smoke!
- [Marsali] Huh?
What?
Fire. Fire!
- Okay. okay.
- Okay. we must go. Quick.
[Marsali] Come.
Félicité. wake up. Wake up.
Come. Come on. quickly.
Quickly.
We must go.
[all coughing]
[flames whooshing]
[Fergus]
Hurry! Hurry!
Fire! Germain!
Henri-Christian. get up!
[coughing continues]
They're not here!
Where are they?
Oh. God! The roof!
They always go there
to look at the stars!
I'll get them.
- Come on!
- [child] Aah!
Go. go! Go. go. go!
[all coughing]
[person] Fire! Fire!
Fire!
Germain! Henri-Christian!
Where are you?
Les garçons! J'arrive!
Bougez pas!
Germain! Henri-Christian!
[coughing]
Vous êtes ou. mes garçons!
[children] Papa! Papa!
I found them! They're here!
[suspenseful music plays]
♪ ♪
[flames whoosh]
[people yelling]
Marsali! Marsali!
- We saw the smoke from the ward!
- Where's Fergus?
The boys...
they went up to the roof.
He's gone after them.
[yelling continues]
Girls. come with me.
sweethearts.
Come with me.
[yelling continues]
♪ ♪
Fire! Fire!
- [Marsali] Fergus!
- Fire! Fire!
♪ ♪
Put this around you.
Yes. Help me.
All right. now go. You go.
I need you to hold on
to your brother. hé?
No. Papa. I won't leave you.
I'll come down right behind you.
Go. go.
Don't look down. Hold on tight.
Hey. hey. you must be brave
now. boys. hé?
Go ahead.
Hold on tight. You can do it.
Hé?
♪ ♪
Oh. Lord.
- [people yelling]
- [Marsali] Oh. Lord!
♪ ♪
Hold on.
- Ah. ah. I'm-I'm slipping!
- [Marsali] No!
- No!
- [screams]
[crowd gasps]
There. It's all right.
It's all right. I've got you.
[sobbing]
[Marsali]
He's fine. Fergus!
♪ ♪
Where is my brother?
[screaming]
[somber music plays]
[sobbing] No!
♪ ♪
[Marsali sobbing]
[gasps]
[gasps] What is it?
I dinna ken. but...
I have a terrible feeling
something is wrong.
[breathing rapidly]
Um...
[breathing slows]
[indistinct chatter]
If anything were to happen
to me. would you stay here...
in this time. with the kids?
Nothing is gonna happen to you.
I know you've just lost
your brother.
I'm so sorry.
But nothing is going to happen
to you.
If it did...
[soft music plays]
♪ ♪
[chuckles]
I would stay.
Of course.
This is our home.
Our whole family's here.
The four of us belong here.
♪ ♪
Five.
[dramatic music plays]
♪ ♪
[Roger chuckles]
Lord John says he can get
another room ready.
I'm afraid to let them
out of my sight...
ever again.
Marsali. you need to sleep.
Sleep.
I'll watch over them.
Someone left us a note.
It was a poem...
about fire.
[soft music plays]
We laughed about it.
We used to get them
from time to time.
♪ ♪
Fergus said the thing to do
was read them aloud
to each other
and then make fun of them
and rank them
from best to worst.
♪ ♪
It could have been an accident.
An ember from a hearth in...
...a building full of paper.
♪ ♪
After all these years...
I didna ken where I ended
and he began.
Now...
there's barely
anything left of him...
...not even...
a body to hold...
just...
[crying]
...ashes and bones.
[continues crying]
♪ ♪
[sniffles] He's in...
he's in every single one
of your children.
You'll always have him with you.
♪ ♪
[Marsali crying silently]
[somber music plays]
♪ ♪
- [sobs]
- [Brianna sniffles]
♪ ♪
[birds chirping]
It's almost as if...
Jane's talking to me.
[cries softly]
It was her last chance
to tell you these things.
We have some things
that we'd like to tell you
as well.
My family home in Scotland
is a place named Broch Tuarach.
But Claire and I lived
in France for a bit.
I worked
with my cousin's winery...
in Paris.
When we were there...
[sighs] ...I had a baby.
a little girl.
Her name was Faith.
I thought she died...
right after she was born.
But now we know
that she couldn't have.
Because...
that baby...
was your mother.
So that means that...
[dramatic music plays]
...she was...
♪ ♪
Well. I'm the lady
she was looking for.
I'm Lady Broch Tuarach.
♪ ♪
We believe we are
your grandparents. lass.
Your family...
your blood.
[Claire]
I know it's a surprise.
It was to us as well.
I was...
very sick...
after your mother was born.
And I only got to hold her...
for a little while.
♪ ♪
And then they-they told me
that she died.
And they took her away.
♪ ♪
Sometimes I feel you
staring at me...
with tears in your eyes.
Is that why?
♪ ♪
Oh. sweetheart.
That has nothing to do with you.
I sang a song...
to your mother
when she was born.
a song my mother sang to me.
And you-you were singing
that same song
in the church at Monmouth
when we met.
Your mother must have sang
that same song to you.
♪ ♪
Sometimes I look at you...
...and you're so beautiful.
like she must have been.
[sniffles]
And it makes me think of...
♪ ♪
...all the things
that I missed.
the things that I lost.
♪ ♪
It just hurts a little bit.
- I'm sorry.
- Oh. no. no. no.
Don't be.
♪ ♪
Having you here...
with us...
it-it mends a-a piece
of my broken heart
that I never thought
could be mended.
How did she know the song...
if she was only a baby?
♪ ♪
I wish we knew.
There's so much
we canna explain.
[Claire] I had...
[sniffles]
...something very special
made of lace.
It was a veil.
But I believe it was made
by your grandmother.
I bought it from her shop
when we lived in Paris.
I wore it to the graveyard...
where I believed
your mother was buried.
And I was so sad.
And I left it in Paris.
♪ ♪
But it makes me so happy
to think that...
we had something
of your grandmother's...
because she is part of you.
♪ ♪
And you are part of me.
And family...
...well. they can be
like lace...
fragile and-and delicate...
[sniffles]
...full of holes and gaps.
like the things
that we don't know.
But... [sniffles]
...like lace. it can be strong.
The threads...
are hard to tear apart.
♪ ♪
I'd like to go to my room now.
[footsteps departing]
Perhaps we should have waited.
♪ ♪
[birds chirping]
Maman. wake up.
Wake up.
[Marsali inhales deeply]
[sighs]
Where are your brother
and sisters?
I told them to go and try
to have some breakfast.
We have to go back
to the print shop.
Papa says
we must rise every day.
ready to bring the news
to the people.
no matter what happens.
"La plume est notre épée."
he says.
We can never lay down our sword.
[Marsali sighs softly]
My brave lad.
Go and join your brother
and sisters.
I'll be there soon.
What will I do without Fergus?
You'll always have
a home with us on the Ridge.
But you could also consider
Beauchamp's offer.
Germain is
a legitimate heir now.
No.
Fergus wouldn't want it.
[soft music plays]
I think what he would want is...
I think he would want you
and his children
to be taken care of.
♪ ♪
Bears considerin'.
[Brianna sighs softly]
[Marsali] But not today.
First...
♪ ♪
[cries softly]
...I need to bury my husband.
♪ ♪
[sighs]
I need to take him home.
♪ ♪
Fanny. darling?
Supper's ready downstairs.
Sweetheart?
Is everything all right?
[ominous music plays]
♪ ♪
Would you like some company?
I'm so sorry. Fanny.
[sighs] It was too much
too soon. perhaps.
But...
we so wanted you to know that...
you were ours.
We ken you might not believe us.
lass. without proof.
Oh. I believe you.
I'm sure my grandmother
made your veil.
She made
the most beautiful things.
You should have seen
the piece I had.
But now I lost it. and...
[crying] I lose everything...
and everyone I love...
my whole family.
And you're my family.
so I'll lose you. too.
You'll go away. or you'll die.
and I'll be even more alone.
I know it's hard to believe
that everything is going to be
all right.
especially after everything
that's happened to you. but...
But...
[soft music plays]
...God tells us that faith
is the evidence
of things not seen.
So...
I will ask you
to have faith in us. lass.
♪ ♪
Claire. they've come home.
- [Claire gasps happily]
- [chuckles]
[Claire] No two people
experience physical pain
in the same way.
Perhaps the same
is true for emotional pain.
But our collective
love of Fergus
was reflected in the agony
of our shared loss.
Our grief was alike.
That wild look of suffering
in Marsali's eyes
was the same I saw in Jamie's.
It was there in my own.
That nauseating ache.
the disbelief
that eats away at you
until you're numb.
A granddaughter who seemed
to drop out of the sky.
a blessing from heaven.
and a son who was taken
from us too soon.
a hellish reality.
Such are the tapestries
of our lives.
threads of shock.
anger. love. and affection.
among the multitude of others.
woven together
as intricately and delicately
as the most beautiful lace.
[banging loudly]
[hammer clatters]
[glasses clatter]
[birds chirping]
[sighs]
[sentimental music plays]
♪ ♪
[speaking French]
Stop fooling around.
Pay attention.
I am.
♪ ♪
It's a great day. laddie.
Where do you think you're going?
Well. with milord.
You remind me I have something
to fight for.
There you are. Milord.
Milady. you've returned?
- Fergus.
- It's a miracle.
Thank you. mon fils.
Stand by my hand.
Fergus. son of my name
and of my heart...
You've saved my life
more than once.
I've simply balanced the scales.
I will miss you. too.
but it won't be goodbye.
Only au revoir.
[priest] And do you have a name?
[Jamie] Fraser.
His name is
Fergus Claudel Fraser.
♪ ♪
[crying]
Come with me.
♪ ♪
[birds chirping]
This is for Fergus...
and for you.
I know he's not with us. but...
maybe you'll find him here...
...Grandda.
[dramatic music plays]
♪ ♪
Thank you...
mo chridhe.
♪ ♪
[exhales shakily]
[light music plays]
♪ ♪
[indistinct chatter]
[speaking French]
Goodbye. sweet Faith.
[Faith crying]
Oh. no. no. no.
no. no. no. no. no.
No. No. no. no. Shh.
♪ I do like to be ♪
- ♪ Beside the seaside ♪
- [crying continues]
♪ I do like to be
Beside the sea ♪
[crying subsides]
♪ I do like to stroll
Along the prom. prom. prom ♪
♪ Where the brass bands play
Diddly bum. bum. bum ♪
♪ ♪
[both] ♪ Oh. I do like to be ♪
♪ Beside the seaside ♪
♪ I do like to be
Beside the sea ♪
♪ Oh. I do like to stroll ♪
♪ Along the prom. prom. prom ♪
♪ Where the brass bands play ♪
♪ Diddly um. bum. bum ♪
♪ So just let me be ♪
♪ Beside the seaside ♪
♪ I'll be beside myself ♪
♪ With glee ♪
♪ And there's lots
Of girls beside ♪
♪ I should like to be beside ♪
♪ Beside the seaside ♪
♪ Beside the sea ♪